Add Anatomy of Table-Level Locks blog (#344)
xataio/mdx-blog: anatomy-of-locks.mdx

---
title: 'Anatomy of Table-Level Locks in PostgreSQL'
description: 'This blog explains locking mechanisms in PostgreSQL, focusing on table-level locks that are required by Data Definition Language (DDL) operations.'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/anatomy-of-locks-og@2x.jpg
  alt: Anatomy of Table-Level Locks in PostgreSQL
author: Gulcin Yildirim Jelinek
authorEmail: gulcin@xata.io
date: 01-10-2025
tags: ['postgres', 'postgresql', 'locks', 'ddl', 'dml', 'MVCC', 'pgroll']
published: true
slug: anatomy-of-locks
canonicalUrl: https://pgroll.com/blog/anatomy-of-table-level-locks-in-postgresql
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/anatomy-of-locks-og@2x.jpg
---

## Art of Locking or Unlocking?

It is normal to think about database locks and go into physical-world lock analogies, and maybe order three books about the history of locks, Persian locks, and lock-picking techniques.

> Probably most of us learn by going deeper into the term “locking” to understand a concept in PostgreSQL that doesn’t really have much to do with physical-world locks, as physical locks are mostly about security.

Reviewer: This intro reads a bit odd to me, maybe it could be:

```
It's common to think about database locks by drawing analogies to physical locks, which might even lead you to order books on the history of locks, Persian locks, and lock-picking techniques.

However, on deeper investigation of "locking" in PostgreSQL we come to realize it doesn't have much to do with physical locks at all, which are primarily about **security**.

Postgres locks though are all about **concurrency** and controlling which transaction can hold a lock while another transaction can do its thing, ideally without ever blocking each other.

But as we know, no world is ideal, whether it’s a door lock or an `AccessShareLock`.
```

- `xmin`: Transaction ID that created this version
- `xmax`: The transaction ID that deleted/updated this version (null if current)
- `cmin`, `cmax`: Command IDs within the transaction
- `ctid`: Physical location of the row version

When a transaction begins, Postgres creates a snapshot containing:
- All active transaction IDs at that moment
- The latest committed transaction ID
- The list of in-progress transactions

Let's see how it works in practice with a simple example:

```sql
-- Initial state of employees table
-- id | name | salary | xmin | xmax
-- 1 | Alice | 50000 | 99 | null
-- Transaction 1 starts (txid: 100)
BEGIN;
SELECT FROM employees WHERE id = 1;
-- Sees: Alice, 50000 (because xmax is null, row is visible)
-- Transaction 2 (txid: 101) updates the salary
BEGIN;
UPDATE employees SET salary = 60000 WHERE id = 1;
-- Creates new version:
-- id | name | salary | xmin | xmax
-- 1 | Alice | 50000 | 99 | 101
-- 1 | Alice | 60000 | 101 | null
COMMIT;
-- Transaction 1 still sees salary 50000 because:
-- 1. It uses snapshot from start of transaction 100
-- 2. Changes by transaction 101 are invisible to snapshot 100

> SELECT FROM employees WHERE id = 1; -- Still sees 50000

Reviewer: Just checking that this is intentionally a nested transaction; I think it is given the commentary in the paragraph below.

Author: I will try putting this into a table format.

Now, let's consider the other extreme: we are locking every operation and each of them waits for another; one finishes, and the other one starts.
We block the whole table for one query that is reading.
That would also be okay if a few users, maybe using a small database, never had to query the same table ever at the same time; like a single-user accounting system running nightly reports.

The moment we have to serve multiple users at the same time, we will have to accept a level of isolation, so we make sure we agree to a standard that ensures we don't get dirty reads or phantom reads and such.
This is why Postgres offers [different isolation levels](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/transaction-iso.html) from Read Committed to Serializable.

## DDL Locks

MVCC approach makes PostgreSQL highly efficient for concurrent DML operations.
Instead of modifying data in place, writes create new copies of the data, allowing reads and writes to proceed without blocking each other.
However, even in an MVCC-based system, some level of locking is unavoidable.
Reads may not block writes, but they still acquire lightweight locks on database objects like tables, types, and views.

> So, MVCC protects you from writes blocking reads, but not from object locks taken by DDL commands.

Reviewer: Is this better?

```suggestion
So, MVCC allows DML to have concurrent access to tables, but locks taken by DDL statements can still lock DML statements
```

Author: > Is this better?

It does not cover the full message, DDL affects writes and reads not just write (DML).
Is it maybe not clear what I am trying to convey?

[Different lock modes conflict with different other modes](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/explicit-locking.html#LOCKING-TABLES).

[![Conflicting Lock Modes](/images/conflicting-lock-modes.png)](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/explicit-locking.html#LOCKING-TABLES)

There are a few key points to understand, **ACCESS EXCLUSIVE** conflicts with everything, including **ACCESS SHARE** (`SELECT`).
Postgres has many optimizations to take weaker lock modes when it can.
However, nothing is perfect, it will still take strong locks on some DDL operations.
Once a transaction takes a strong lock, it holds it even if the statement has finished.

A critical lesson is that DDL operations may block both writes and reads for the entire duration of the transaction.
Because of this, it's crucial to avoid mixing commands that require strong locks with others in the same transaction.
For example, if you need to perform both a table alteration and data updates, it's better to separate these into different transactions to minimize blocking.

> ## Understanding Lock Queues in Postgres

Reviewer: This section could link to a previous blog post specifically about the lock queue:

https://xata.io/blog/migrations-and-exclusive-locks

Author: I will, thanks!
